Welcome, everyone.
As I said a couple years ago,
it's practically impossible to give a
very dynamic and thrilling presentation
after the great Steve Heyman.
Alas, here we are.
My name is Mike Bombich.
I am a systems engineer with Apple.
I've been...
I've been with Apple for four years.
For those of you that don't know me,
I've got a sick obsession with
Mac OS X deployment technologies.
And one of those is, of course, NetBoot.
And that's what we're
here to talk about today,
especially in the context
of large networks.
In a nutshell,
NetBoot is a collection of server
services that allow a client machine
to discover and boot from a disk image
that's kept on that Mac OS X Server.
That's a really basic
overview of what NetBoot is.
If you're not familiar with it,
I encourage you to take a look at
the Mac OS X Server documentation,
the system image documentation at the
Apple Server documentation website.
I also encourage you to take a
look at the Boot PD man page.
There's a lot of really good
technical detail about how NetBoot
works on Mac OS X Server in there.
The rest of this presentation, though,
is like drinking through a fire hose.
So if you're not more familiar with that,
hang on to your seat.
In order to get a really good
idea of how to leverage NetBoot
technology on a large network,
it helps to have a really
in-depth understanding of how
the NetBoot process works.
Today I'm going to break down,
I'm going to talk about the server
services that are involved with
NetBoot on Mac OS X Server and
some of the NetBoot support files.
I'm going to break down NetBoot
into four distinct stages based
upon what you see when you're
sitting at a NetBooting client.
I'm going to go into some really detail
on the BSDP exchange between a client
and a server during the NetBoot process.
And then I'll wrap up the last three
stages of the NetBoot process by talking
about the role of those NetBoot support
files in the rest of the boot process.
With that under your belt,
I'll hand it over to Joel Rennich
with Apple and Gavin Cook of Genentech
to talk about how they've used
NetBoot in real world scenarios.
So with the intro done,
let's go ahead and dig in.
This is going to be a lot of fun.
Server admin can be a little
deceiving when it comes to
enabling the NetBoot service.
It's not actually just one service
that you're enabling when you
click on that start service button.
There are several different services
that are enabled in the background
and configured on Mac OS X Server.
For starters, the BootPS launch daemon is
initiated by LaunchD and loaded
to listen for traffic on port 67.
That's the BootP port.
BootPD is the daemon that's launched
when traffic is received on this
port to communicate with a client
that's issuing a DHCP or BSDP request.
TFTP, or Trivial File Transfer Protocol,
is the protocol that's used by clients
to download the NetBoot support files.
NFS is used to mount
the NetBoot disk image.
Some people choose to use HTTP in
networks where NFS is not a good choice.
And finally,
in the case of diskless NetBoot,
AFP is used to attach
that NetBoot shadow file.
In order for a client to
boot from a NetBoot server,
that client needs
basically a NetBoot set,
which is just a folder of five files that
reside on your NetBoot NFS SharePoint.
In that folder,
there's the nbimageinfo.plist.
This is a NetBoot set configuration file.
It contains details like a unique
identifier for that NetBoot set.
It contains the name of the NetBoot set,
where various files within
the NetBoot set are located.
They can be on other servers,
for example.
And then what architectures are
supported by that NetBoot set,
and what hardware can
actually use that NetBoot set.
There's a disk image file.
This is just a disk image of a fully
configured Mac OS X installation
for the case of standard NetBoot,
or a disk image of, for example,
the Mac OS X installation DVD.
There's a booter file.
This is your secondary loader.
This is just a bridge between the
firmware of the machine and the
executed kernel of the machine.
This kick starts the NetBoot process.
Mach.macosx is your kernel file.
This is what you would find
at mock_kernel at the root
level of the file system.
Mach.macosx.mkext is your
kernel extension cache.
Basically, that's just a cache of drivers
that the client needs to be able
to boot from a disk image that's
hosted on a network server.
So these last three files are
responsible for the most primitive
part of the boot process.
They really communicate with
all the pieces of the hardware
at the very lowest level.
So it really should come as no
surprise that these last three
files are architecture specific.
You may have noticed that the 10.4.4
server admin update allows you to NetBoot
Intel clients from your Mac OS X Server.
And basically the way this works is
that the architecture specific files,
if they're PowerPC,
they can either exist at the
root level of your NetBoot set
or in a folder labeled PPC,
or for the Intel architecture
specific files,
they need to be located
in a folder called I386,
as you can see in the screenshot here.
When you NetBoot a client,
the first thing you see is a
flashing globe that is replaced
with the Apple logo and the
spinning globe beneath it.
That spinning globe is eventually
replaced with a progress indicator
that you would see on any typical boot.
And eventually you see a blue
screen indicating that the
Windows Server has loaded.
And finally you see either a login
window or the installer interface.
We can use these visual indicators
to actually break down the
NetBoot process into four stages.
First of all,
why would we want to do this?
Well, NetBoot involves a whole slew of
communication protocols and different
services hosted on different machines.
Who here has had a NetBoot problem?
Okay.
More often than not,
it's actually your network.
And I'll tell you why in a little bit.
But by breaking down the NetBoot
process into four stages,
using those visual indicators as cues,
we can really get a better
grip on troubleshooting.
For example,
if my machine is stuck at the
blinking globe and it never proceeds,
I know that I'm in the
DHCP and BSDP exchange,
and maybe there's a
problem with that exchange.
So I can use some specific
troubleshooting tools
to dig into that issue.
So I can use some specific
troubleshooting tools
to dig into that issue.
So I can use some specific
troubleshooting tools
to dig into that issue.
So the first stage of
the NetBoot process,
the blinking globe, is initiated by,
first of all,
the firmware determines that our
boot device is a NetBoot disk image.
So the first thing that firmware
does is it sends out a DHCP discover.
This initiates the
BSDP and DHCP exchange.
This is actually the most important part,
the most important stage
of the NetBoot process.
This is where the client gets
all of its information about how
to boot from our network server.
This is also the stage
that most frequently fails,
especially on a large network.
You have to do some specific router
configuration to make this work,
quote unquote, out of the box.
So I want to go into a little
more detail in this particular
part of the NetBoot stage.
And actually,
I want to first give you a 30,000
foot overview of what kind of
happens between the server and the
client during this initial exchange.
But I want to do it for
two different scenarios.
In our first scenario,
the client has never NetBooted before.
The client has never indicated a
preference for a specific NetBoot set.
In the second scenario,
we do have a preference.
Either the client has booted from
our network server or the client
has booted from our network server.
Either the client has booted from
that NetBoot server before or we've
gone into the startup disk pref pane
and actually chosen a NetBoot set.
The exchange between the client and
server is actually quite different
in these two different scenarios.
So in our first scenario,
our initial boot sequence,
the client issues via
broadcast a DHCP discover.
Our DHCP server responds with an offer.
We request,
and the DHCP acknowledges that request.
This is a standard DHCP exchange.
There's nothing special about it here.
Not having received a response
from any NetBoot servers yet,
our client now goes
into a collection mode.
It issues a BSDP informed list via
the broadcast address to get a list of
NetBoot servers that are out there on the
network that have a NetBoot set for me.
I'll play the client.
Our NetBoot server responds,
if it has a NetBoot set for our client,
with a BSDP ACK list.
I'm a NetBoot server and I've got
this list or this NetBoot set for you.
After a selection process,
the client issues a BSDP-informed
select to the NetBoot server.
And the server responds with
our really juicy packet,
the BSTP Act Select,
which contains all the information
our client needs to actually
boot from the NetBoot server.
And then the client will
go ahead and start the next
phase of the NetBoot process.
So that's how it works for a client
that has never NetBooted before.
What if we do have a preference?
What if I want to boot from
a specific NetBoot image?
And more importantly,
where could I even store that preference?
If you think about it, we have this thing
called diskless NetBoot.
And if I don't have a disk in my machine,
how do I store a preference
for what NetBoot server I want
for this specific client?
We could store it in firmware,
but that would be kind of
complicated from a UI perspective.
But what we actually do is the NetBoot
preference is stored at the server
in the NetBoot bindings database.
This is a flat file located at var
db bsdpd_clients at the server.
And the server will create a
record for a client any time it
receives a bsdp_informed_select.
So there's actually two different
times that we'll get that
bsdp_informed_select from a client.
We saw one in the last slide.
I pulled the machine out of the box.
I held down the N key.
It went through the
DHCP and bsdp_exchange.
And the last thing the client
sent was a bsdp_ax_select.
My client implicitly selected the default
boot image ID on my NetBoot server.
So the other place that this can happen
is there's actually a bsdp client built
into the startup disk preference pane.
When you open up the startup
disk preference pane,
and there's NetBoot servers available,
you notice that, first of all,
the startup disk preference pane
will issue a bsdp_informed_select.
form list.
And all of the NetBoot servers within
range will issue a list of all of
the NetBoot images that they have to
offer for that client's architecture.
You then click on one,
and startup disk preference pane
sends out a bsdp_informed_select.
And the NetBoot server will create
a binding for that client in
that NetBoot bindings database.
So it's important to point out both
of these scenarios because if you
were to pull a machine out of the box,
hold down the N key,
boot from your default NetBoot set,
Go on about your business.
And then go to Server Admin
and change your default
NetBoot set to something else.
And then go back to that client,
hold down the N key.
What's it going to do?
It's going to boot from the previous
default NetBoot set because that
client had implicitly made a selection.
It had made a preference
for that NetBoot set.
So that tends to confuse some people.
You can actually hold down Option N on
the new Intel Macs to boot from the real
default NetBoot set to ignore the BSL.
Go on about your business.
And then go to Server Admin
and change your default
NetBoot set to something else.
And then go back to that client,
hold down the N key.
What's it going to do?
It's going to boot from the previous
default NetBoot set because that
client had implicitly made a selection.
It had made a preference
for that NetBoot set.
So that tends to confuse some people.
You can actually hold down Option N on
the new Intel Macs to boot from the real
default NetBoot set to ignore the BSL.
So if I do have a preference,
my client is going to send
out that DHCP discover,
just like it did before via broadcast.
The DHCP server is going
to pick up on that.
But now my NetBoot server is saying, hey,
I've got a record for this client
in my NetBoot bindings database.
It's going to respond with
a BSDP offer immediately.
And of course,
this has to occur via broadcast,
because our client doesn't
have an IP address yet.
The client's going to go ahead
and request that IP address,
get an act from the server.
And now, because I have everything I need
to start the NetBoot process
from my BSDP offer packet,
I'm going to go ahead and immediately
initiate the NetBoot process.
So those are the two phases of NetBoot.
And that's the 30,000 foot overview.
That was the easy part.
So now you're stuck.
Now you're stuck.
You're at the flashing globe,
and you can't figure out why
you're not getting past it.
You're stuck somewhere in
the middle of this process.
What can we do to get more
information about what is passing
between the client and the server?
How can we get more details on this?
Hands down, one of the easiest
things that you can do.
Oh, that's beautiful.
I've never seen it that big.
One of the easiest things that
you can do is a packet trace.
This is a very simple thing.
You can tell how simple it is
based on that tcpdump command.
And you can do that at the server and
you can see all of the packets fly
between your client and the DHCP server
and your client and the NetBoot server.
And if we pick this apart,
we can see the IP header, the UDP header,
our RFC951 standard
DHCP packet information,
a little magic cookie that says
that the rest of this packet
is our DHCP vendor options,
and our BSDP vendor options are stuck
in there in a little opaque value.
Now,
I got really good at reading hexadecimal.
In fact, I printed out a little cheat
sheet and taped it to my desk.
My wife called me a geek.
and I think we're all there though.
For those that aren't really
good with the hexadecimal,
there's a little bit of ASCII on
the right there that we can read
some things like the boot file,
the server name.
And we can maybe try and discern
what kind of information is passing
between the client and the server.
Decoding those vendor options,
especially the BSTP vendor options,
could be a real challenge if this
was the approach that we took.
So there's actually an easier way.
If you recall,
Boot PD is the server process
that responds to DHCP and
BSTP requests from our client.
If we unload that Boot PS launch
daemon and then load
Boot PD manually in verbose mode,
we can actually get a lot more
information about the communication
between the client and the server.
You can use these commands
to put it into verbose mode.
Don't forget to take
it out of verbose mode,
otherwise you will have NetBoot problems.
And then, so,
I don't want to give away too much yet.
The next several slides,
what I've done is I've
taken my boot PD server,
I put it into verbose mode,
and I netbooted one client
against my netboot server.
And then I'm going to see
all of the communication,
one packet at a time,
between the client and the server,
and then I went ahead and color-coded
things and broke it down a little bit to
make what is very dry a little bit more
interesting and a little more digestible.
So in our first packet,
our client issues that DHCP discover
out to the broadcast address.
Boot PD, sitting on port 67, says, hey,
there's a client request,
and it parses all of that hexadecimal,
all of that information,
and spits out our DHCP information,
the standard RFC 951 stuff.
I cut some of it off here because
it's not particularly interesting,
and I needed some space in my slide.
Our DHCP vendor options,
we've got some interesting things here.
The message type is discover.
We've got a parameter request list,
client identifier,
vendor class identifier,
and then our vendor-specific options,
our BSDP stuff.
And then Boot PD further breaks that
down by parsing out the BSDP options.
So we see lots of information here.
We see exactly what conversation
our client and our server
are starting to have.
In the red there is what you
normally see in the system log.
Raise your hand if you've ever tried
to use the Boot PD messages in system
log to actually troubleshoot NetBoot.
Okay, that's great because that's
kind of a waste of time.
It's interesting,
but it's not actually very useful,
and it shouldn't be.
We shouldn't typically dump debug
information into System Log.
So BootPD sees this packet and
it actually recognizes it as a
BSTP discoverer in addition to a
DHCP discoverer because our client passed
on two critical pieces of information.
Our client passed on that vendor
class identifier saying that I am an
Apple Boot Service Discovery Protocol
client.
My architecture is I386 and my
hardware identifier that I pulled
out of firmware is MacBook Pro 1.1.
I've also asked for two specific
vendor options from the NetBoot server.
I've asked the server to identify
itself using that vendor class
string and I've also asked for
some specific BSTP parameters.
In this case, my NetBoot server is not
providing the DHCP service.
So while that packet was interesting,
I'm going to show it to you and parse it.
Boot PD is not going to respond to it.
It's just going to ignore it because
we're not providing that DHCP service.
In a case like this, I like to also do a
TCP dump at the same time.
I don't run the DHCP server.
Joel down the hall runs the DHCP server.
And he's kind of shady.
So I want to make sure that my
DHCP server is giving my client
an IP address in that offer
and a pingable domain gateway.
Our client is going to
respond with a DHCP request.
This is going to go out via broadcast.
So again, my Boot PD server is going
to see that client request.
Again, this is interesting insofar
as it's coming in on port 67.
But again,
I'm going to ignore this because
I'm not providing the DHCP service.
And further,
I'm not the server identifier
that's mentioned in this packet.
So I'm not supposed to respond to this.
So I'll just log this and move on.
Again, back to our TCP dump output.
I get a DHCP ACK from my DHCP server.
So I should have some confidence at this
point that the DHCP portion of the first
stage of NetBoot is working properly.
My client should have a
configured network interface.
Not having received anything from
a NetBoot server at this point,
my client is now going to
go into collection mode.
It's going to issue a BSTP inform
out to the broadcast address.
and it's going to ask for a list
of the NetBoot servers out there.
It's a very simple request.
Before the NetBoot
server simply responds,
though, the NetBoot server is going
to qualify this client.
If you've ever looked in server admin,
you see you can set up a NetBoot filter.
You can filter out specific
clients to prevent them from
booting from your server.
The first thing that BootPD does is it
determines if this client's MAC address,
its client identifier,
is in one of these NetBoot filters.
If it is, it'll just ignore the packet.
If not, it's going to go ahead and loop
through each enabled NetBoot set
and further qualify this client.
First, does this NetBoot set support
this client's architecture?
Is this client's system
ID supported by this NetBoot set?
Both of those pieces of information,
BootPD is going to pull out
of that nbimageinfo.plist
file from that NetBoot set.
It's also going to check to see that
there is a booter file for this client.
This one's a little obscure.
It seems like an odd requirement.
But BootPD will actually look to
see if that booter file exists
for this client's architecture.
And if it doesn't,
even if the NetBoot set says it
supports that client architecture,
it's not going to respond.
So if for whatever reason
there isn't a booter set,
Joel deleted it from my server,
then our server's not going to respond.
And finally,
BootPD will determine if this
NetBoot set is the default NetBoot
set for this client's architecture.
This isn't a requirement.
It is optional.
But if you have several different
NetBoot sets that meet the
criteria for your client,
by specifying a default NetBoot set,
you're going to reduce some ambiguity.
You can be sure that your client
is getting the right NetBoot set.
So our server will issue a BSDP Act List,
which includes two important
pieces of information,
the default boot image ID that
it's providing to the client,
and then server priority,
which I'll talk about next.
Our client is also going to
qualify the servers that respond.
It won't just pick the
first one that responds.
It actually issues that BSDP-informed
list several times to make sure that
it gets a very thorough list of NetBoot
servers that are out there and the
default images that they're hosting.
Once it gets that thorough list,
it's going to pick the NetBoot server
and the default NetBoot set on that
server that has the lowest load,
that has the least load.
And it does that by using that server
priority tag that it gets from that
last packet from the NetBoot server.
What that is,
is basically just a number of clients
that are in that NetBoot bindings
database for that NetBoot server.
So if server A has three
clients bound to it,
server B has five,
we're going to go ahead and
pick server A because presumably
there's fewer clients actually
NetBooting from server A.
So this is an important point.
If you're doing some stuff
with load balancing and you're
getting some odd results,
say you've got no clients
booting from one server and
like 50 from another server,
you may need to clear out that
BSDPD clients file because that contains
some information about previous clients
that had booted from that server.
Finally, our client has made a choice.
It's going to issue a
BSTP-informed select,
indicating that it's selecting.
It's going to indicate a specific
server identifier and that default image
ID that was provided from that server.
Finally,
our server issues a BSTP Act Select.
This, of course, is the juiciest packet.
It's got all sorts of information.
We've got a TFTP path to our boot file,
that booter.
We've got a root path,
which is the NFS or HTTP path
to our NetBoot disk image.
And then we've got, of course,
that selected boot image ID again.
And we also have a name that
we can assign to ourselves when
we get into the boot process.
At this point,
the client has all of the information
that it needs to move on to the
next phase of the NetBoot process.
We're done with the BSTP exchange.
This is where we see the
Apple logo and the spinning globe.
This is where the client will
download those NetBoot support files.
The first thing that happens here is
firmware will take that boot file path
from our BSTP X select packet and it will
download the booter and execute that.
As soon as it executes the booter,
firmware is done with the machine.
Firmware is going to unload so it
can hand off all of the resources
back to the rest of the OS.
And booter will assume control
of the rest of the boot process.
Booter is then going to
determine the TFTP path to the
other NetBoot support files,
the kernel and the
kernel extension cache.
It's then going to download those.
Finally, the booter will execute and then
transition control to the kernel.
And that's really all there is to this
particular stage of the NetBoot process.
During this stage,
that spinning globe is kind
of a progress indicator,
indicating that you're
downloading files via TFTP.
The next stage, of course,
we see that progress indicator.
This is where the client is
loading our NetBoot support files.
Again, the kernel has control
of the system here.
The kernel is going to replace
that spinning globe with the
progress indicator that we usually
see when we boot up Mac OS X.
The kernel will then attempt to load
the kernel extension cache because we
need some very basic driver support
for accessing the network and mounting
a disk image over that network.
Once we've loaded that extension cache,
we're going to attempt to
mount the NetBoot disk image
either via HTTP or NFS.
These are two very important things
because you can tell just based on
these steps that occur two things
that could happen in this process.
If we've got a bad KEXT cache or we've
got a KEXT cache for an inappropriate
architecture or inappropriate hardware,
you might get a kernel panic here when
the kernel tries to load that cache.
This happens all the time
when you get that new Mac Pro,
you try to fire it up from your
old NetBoot image and it instantly
kernel panics right after you get
that spinning progress indicator.
That's because you need to update
your kernel extension cache or
update your kernel extension cache.
So you can't just create
a new NetBoot set.
People also see problems here when
they attempt to mount that NetBoot disk
image over NFS and they've either got
ports blocked or NFS isn't even running
on their server for some odd reason.
So if we succeed in these two steps,
we've got a set of drivers and we've
got a mounted root file system,
we're ready to roll.
The kernel is going to go ahead and
execute launchd and launchd is going to
initiate the rest of the boot process
by firing off the ETSI RC script.
In the case of a standard NetBoot,
the RC script is also going to
execute the RC.Netboot script.
This script is responsible for attaching
a shadow file to our NetBoot disk image.
If you've ever looked at
the NFS configuration for
your NetBoot SharePoint,
you may have noticed that
it's exported to world,
but it's exported as read-only.
This, of course, is a pillar of NetBoot.
I want a bulletproof disk
that I can NetBoot my clients,
they can make whatever changes they want,
and I can just reboot that to
wipe out all those changes.
That's because those changes
aren't occurring at the server,
those changes are occurring
in that shadow file.
Typically,
I'm going to look to the first local
hard drive to create that NetBoot shadow
file because of performance reasons.
It's much faster to make a lot of
small writes to that local disk.
In the case of diskless NetBoot, though,
in some areas, perhaps, say,
the United States government that
has very sensitive information
and they don't want anything ever
written to an internal drive,
they actually remove the drives
altogether from those systems.
In that case, I don't have that internal
drive available to me.
I'm going to use a network
SharePoint to create that shadow file.
And the way that I do that is,
one thing I didn't tell you before,
is that BSDP X select packet
that I got from the server
is actually stored in RAM.
And there's tons of information in it,
a little bit more than I was
forthcoming in that last slide.
We also have a shadow mount path,
which is an AFP path.
Including a username and a dynamically
generated temporary password,
a server address,
and the AFP SharePoint that I can use.
I'm going to go ahead and
mount that SharePoint,
and then I'm going to use the shadow
file path parameter out of my NetBoot
packet to determine where on that
SharePoint I can create my shadow file.
So,
assuming all of this occurs correctly,
I should have a mounted file system
that appears to me as read-right.
And I can go ahead and conclude
the rest of the boot process,
which is characterized by the
loading of the Windows server
and our sweet little dock.
So I hope from this that you've
learned that there are some
challenges to the NetBoot process,
but by breaking it down
into specific stages,
you can really--
Pick specific troubleshooting methods
and not just try all of them or go about
like a chicken with its head cut off.
Most notably, like DHCP,
BSTP also uses extensively broadcast.
Joel will talk a little bit more
about how this can be overcome.
But if you don't configure your
routers to pass on these broadcast
packets to your NetBoot server,
well, the very first stage of NetBoot
is going to fail if you attempt
to NetBoot across subnets.
Again,
several communication protocols are used,
often from several different servers,
managed by several different people.
So not only are there technical issues
with managing several different servers,
but there's often political
issues that you have to deal with.
Of course, you all are going to
have to work those out.
And finally, DHCP is a requirement.
On large networks,
this should be a no-brainer.
Raise your hand if you manually configure
IP addresses for 15,000 machines.
But there are certain cases at
Penn State University that are forced
to use manual IP address allocation.
This is actually potentially solvable,
I learned just in the
last couple of days.
As of right now, DHCP is a requirement,
but that is something that
hopefully we can move on from.
So now that you all
are experts on Netboot,
I'm going to go ahead and hand the
reins over to Joel Rennich to talk
about how he's used Netboot in Japan.
Thank you, Mike.
Joel Rennich with Apple Enterprise.
And I won't do any packets.
and David We're done with packets.
So first I want to talk
about some NetBoot fallacies.
Over the years some myth and other
stuff of NetBoot has come up and so
sometimes people think it's a little
different than what it really is.
You don't need a DHCP and
NetBoot on the same box.
We haven't done that
since colored plastic.
So once we moved into the whites
and the blacks and the silver cases,
you don't need to have your NetBoot
and your DHCP server on the same box.
So don't worry about that.
You don't need an Apple DHCP server.
As Mike talked about, any DHCP will do.
We don't care where it comes from.
We just add some extra stuff
afterwards once you've already
got the IP address that you need.
So no,
you don't need an Apple DHCP server.
Another fallacy is that the
larger the NetBoot image,
the longer it's going to take to boot,
the longer it's going
to take to use stuff.
No, that's really not the case.
That one kind of surprised me,
but we found with very,
very large NetBoot images that since the
NetBoot client only grabs what it needs,
who cares if you've got 30 gigs sitting
there on the server on that disk image?
We'll only need the pieces that we use.
It's not like we're transferring the
whole file down to the NetBoot client.
Size really doesn't matter.
Just keep that in mind.
Another issue that a lot of
people thought you could only
have 16 NFSD processes running.
Obviously NetBoot heavily leverages
NFS if you're using NetBoot over NFS.
And in the server admin GUI you
could only set 16 of these in there.
That was kind of a bug.
It was a little UI limitation.
So you could actually go into
NetInfo and actually edit one of
the config files to up that up.
Or now starting with 10.4.7
I think we fixed that.
So you should be able to put
upwards of a lot more into there.
NetBoot Server needs to be on
the same subnet as the client's
is not necessary whatsoever.
So you can use some stuff
called a DHCP helper,
or you can actually statically
assign it if you wanted to.
DHCP helper is much, much easier.
And I even have a little graphic that
kind of shows you how this works.
And you've got your iMacs up there.
And you've got a switch.
Typically this is done in the switch,
sometimes in the router.
If you have a layer 3 switch,
a DHCP helper is going to allow
you to broadcast DHCP requests
to different subnets.
And it's typically used so that you can
put your DHCP servers on the other side
of the building or something like that.
But you can also use that exact
same technique or tool to broadcast
boot P requests for the BSDP stuff.
All right.
So in this case,
the clients go off and they
fire off DHCP requests.
And that gets echoed to both the
DHCP servers and to the NetBoot servers.
And then each one responds
with what it needs.
The DHCP gives DHCP information.
The NetBoot gives NetBoot
information there.
If you were here at WWDC last year,
you probably heard us talk a little
bit about a bank in Tokyo that
we've been doing some work with.
There are some people in the audience
who are even very involved in this.
So hopefully I don't get anything wrong,
because I only go there on weekends now.
So I wanted to give you some ideas.
This is a fairly large
NetBoot environment.
So I'll give you some numbers
about how we're doing stuff,
where all the pieces fit together.
I've been accused by a fellow presenter
that this is in the PowerPoint 2.0 style,
that it's very fast.
So we'll see if you stay with me.
So 1,500 is the number of NetBoot
clients that they're using right now.
They're going to scale that up to
2,500 over the next couple of months,
and that's about full,
2,500 Netbooting iMacs.
And they use one Netboot image.
So all 2,500 are using one Netboot image.
Cool stuff.
That image is 15 gigs.
15 gigs of space on there is the
NetBoot image for all those 2500 iMacs.
150 to 200,
the number of NetBoot clients per server.
All right,
so tweaking out the NFSD processes,
doing some other stuff,
getting more servers in there as
possible when you need to scale up more.
But it's been very solid and a
very good technology to work with.
120 seconds is a typical boot process.
So not nearly as fast as you
would be off a local drive,
but that makes sense.
Still not too annoying.
There are some things that you can
do that can severely degrade that.
So hopefully you don't do those
things like mess with your network,
remove your DHCP servers
and things like that.
Helps you out a lot.
10 minutes.
Time to Netboot 250 Netboot
systems at the same time.
That was kind of fun when
we first started off.
We grabbed a whole floor of iMacs,
used ARD,
and booted them all at the same time.
And this big startup chime kind
of echoed throughout the floor.
So when you hit them all at the
same time and you really kind of
hammer the two Netboot servers that
we had supporting these 250 clients,
it took about 10 minutes
from start to finish.
A lot of machines started up early.
Some machines took the full
10 minutes to go there.
So just keep that in mind that if you
ever had to restart them all at once,
it's going to be a lot
longer than individually.
40 kilometers, which is about 24.8 miles,
is the length between one of
the data centers and where
some of the clients are.
We are actually Netbooting
across WAN links.
WAN links in this case
is like gigabit fiber.
That's a little misleading.
However, they boot off that connections
without even knowing that
they're booting off across town.
There are, however,
some remote sites that
have a 50 megabit link.
To some of the branch offices.
And we were very hesitant about this,
but they are Netbooting off those links.
Not a whole lot of machines.
We just have a couple in each of the
branch offices that are doing this.
But they do go over 50 megabit links,
and they're usable.
They're not speedy.
They take longer to boot up
and some of the other stuff,
but they can do it.
This kind of shocked our
Netboot engineering group that
they were even doing that,
let alone that it was working.
12 hours.
Important,
important thing to keep in mind.
Because that's the time of the
flight from Chicago to Tokyo.
And since I've been almost
commuting with some of the other
people that have been out there,
you understand that pretty well.
So here's a little picture of
one of the floors full of IMAX.
They look all pretty.
This is a little older picture.
These are the G5s.
They're transitioning to
all intels to keep it all in
one processor architecture.
A typical kind of desk there.
Some pieces there,
a little eyesight in all the machines.
And a really kind of messy but hard
to get any less complex than this kind
of topographical map of their network.
We were going to point some things out,
but I think it has more effect
if you just kind of stare at
it and look at all the lines.
The graphics guy was like, yeah,
we could highlight some of this stuff,
but that'd be tough.
So the idea here, though,
is that all the iMacs are NetBooting.
We've got an Active Directory environment
set up in the Kerberos cross realm.
Open Directory is the top dog in this.
We have some Oracle Documentum
Red Hat clients all using
LDAP through Open Directory.
Home shares on OS X servers.
We're probably looking at
some other stuff for that.
NetBoot servers, LDAP management,
Kerberos authentication,
kind of the whole ball of wax,
which would have been
hard enough to begin with.
But now that you throw in NetBooting,
it really becomes interesting.
But some very cool stuff so far.
Things have been going pretty well there.
So some ideas of a practical
NetBoot application.
So next I'm going to hand it off to
Gavin Cook from Genentech to talk about
some of the stuff that he's doing.
Thanks, Joel.
So I'm Gavin Cook,
Macintosh Systems Architect at Genentech.
And building on what Mike kind of showed,
we've basically extended
NetBoot so we could use NetBoot
as a method for distributing
10.4 out to all of our users.
We use NetBoot to roll out 10.4
because it allows us to basically
build a virtual upgrade CD,
but instead of having to go
replicate thousands of these CDs,
or actually would be DVDs at this stage,
or in the past we'd use FireWire drives
with a team of techs that would go out,
meet with the customer, oh,
the customer didn't show up, oh, no,
this is a bad time,
and got this new surprise meeting.
It took us forever to get 10.3 rolled
out due to these little unseen incidents.
We'd spent so much time scheduling
people and getting things
set up for the right time,
people would miss.
So this was great.
This allowed us to just
basically give it to the users.
They could run it when they needed to.
I was able to get it so it's
more convenient for them,
cost us less money,
we had less staff involved.
It was a really good upgrade.
It also gives us a lot of flexibility.
It's just a little bit more
control than the default
network install technique does.
We're basically using a true NetBoot.
We're loading a new OS.
We've completely tuned and
customized that OS that we boot,
and then that OS is essentially doing
an upgrade of the user's system.
So we're kind of running with no backups,
no net, as it were.
It worked out really well.
What we did to extend this is we've built
a custom AppleScript Studio application
that we pass out to the
users from our web server.
They download it.
It's basically a single
button for the most part.
And it connects up to the NetBoot system.
I'll kind of go through that.
We're also using PHP scripts in
the back end to manage the client
connections and to get a picture
of how many clients are connecting,
where they're connecting to.
All the PHP scripts manage
the whole flow of the system.
MySQL database to store
the session information.
We're tracking what
clients are upgrading,
what they're upgrading from,
how long it took them to upgrade.
And that data just ran
all over the place.
We had some systems that
I think are fastest.
Complete from beginning to end system,
I'm sure it was a desktop,
was I think 12 minutes.
Blew me away.
And then another system we had
I think ran out the worst I think
I saw was about 45 minutes.
So I'm assuming that was
probably an older iMac.
We're using a custom local.rc in
the shell level that basically
once that system boots up,
we're booted off the NetBoot image,
we're able to use that custom local.rc
file to basically start communicating
back up to the PHP scripts in MySQL.
Actually, sorry.
We also did a custom startup
item that would install
additional packages that we had.
So we have some management
stuff we wanted to use.
We also wanted to get everybody up to
10.4.4 at the time is what we're using.
We're upgrading that now to go to 10.4.7.
So we have this final round that
kind of does some light housekeeping.
[Transcript missing]
We're also checking the system
specs to be sure they have an
Ethernet network connection,
to be sure they have power,
to be sure they have enough RAM,
enough free hard drive space.
Putting this client in allows us
to do so much more than what we can
just do by holding down the N key.
We're able to do a lot of
preliminary stuff before we
just throw them onto this image.
So it allows us to be sure that that
system is really ready to handle
what we're about to do with it.
Again, as I mentioned,
this integrates the NetBoot
sessions with the PHP MySQL server
and setting the firmware,
just the whole network thing.
Can't stress that enough.
So basically once you download
this little application,
you launch it,
this is what it will look like.
Ask for your admin password.
All of our local users are admins
so they can install their own apps.
Essentially you need admin privileges on
that system in order to set the firmware.
So if you don't have
that on your systems,
that could be a stepping little thing
you have to get over a little harder.
Basically,
it checks to be sure you have power.
In the case of a laptop,
you might not have a
power source connected,
so it'll ask you to connect
it to a power adapter,
and then you quit and try again.
Let's say you don't have
a network connection,
so we've got to have Ethernet.
Please connect Ethernet.
Try again.
Oh, you're trying to be sneaky.
You're on wireless.
It's not going to work.
Got to have Ethernet.
Try again.
Basically,
if you get through all this stuff,
we've also checked the system's RAM,
we've checked the available disk space,
you're ready to upgrade.
We tell the users this is going
to take from 30 to 50 minutes,
just because we really want to
set the expectation a lot higher,
and then we can be so
much faster than that,
they'll just be so impressed.
We really, in testing this,
we found that we had a huge issue,
not with our servers and
how big we made our servers,
or how many servers we had,
or how many clients, it was really about
the client on the end.
So, in a very, you know...
Simple environment where
all systems are the same,
similar to what Joel was working with,
that's going to be a lot tighter number.
You can really have a much better
idea of what that picture looks like.
In an environment where you're completely
heterogeneous and you have anything from,
you know, the old colored plastic
all the way on up,
it can really be a challenge.
And so we wanted to set the
user expectation with that.
Basically, once the client reboots,
it's going to go into the NetBoot image,
it will be installing Tiger.
Once you're done with that,
it's going to restart again,
and then we throw up a custom
display screen that just basically
has a progress indicator.
They never see the OS,
and it says installing
additional packages.
So instead of seeing the Macintosh
is booting and you have the
little progress indicator,
we kind of hijacked that whole
thing with a custom RC file.
And that allows us to install
these additional packages kind
of very cleanly without the
user having to interact with it.
So once you press restart,
you can basically walk
away from your system,
and you come back in an hour
after a meeting or something,
you're going to have a new OS.
Really our big concern was our network.
We wanted to protect the network and
protect the bandwidth of the network.
We're basically running one gigabit links
from all of our edge routers and switches
back up to the core of the network.
So we're very concerned about having,
you know, every subnet we can basically
have up to like 240 systems.
255, but yeah, we've got some devices.
So we really wanted to ensure
that we're not going to flood that
connection and affect the network
performance for all of the other users.
So really the big focus for our system
was shaping the network traffic.
Each client will be copying the full
2.5 gig image during the upgrade
because you're installing the OS.
Everything on there is
going to get touched.
We placed our servers really in
areas of high Mac concentration.
We ran a number of network scans where
we're basically analyzing how many
Macs we had on different subnets,
set a percentage to each of those areas,
and that's how we picked
where to put our servers.
The server name is basically based
off the building that they serve
and we kind of use Zen as our
prefix for the whole system because
we want it to be very smooth.
And so everything would be like Zen 1,
Zen 5.
Then we also place two servers in our
data center to serve the other buildings.
Again, similar to Joel's environment,
we're booting that,
basically our data centers
over a dark fiber WAN link,
so no problems with that.
Works really well.
This is a picture of the environment.
You can see that at the top
we have that Zen server,
which is basically our database server
running the PHP scripts and the MySQL.
It manages the entire process.
So when a user installs this application,
they run it, the first thing that client
does is it goes and communicates
with the Zen server.
And it says, hi, I'm so-and-so's machine.
This is the building I live in.
We determine the building
based off the subnet.
We basically built a table of all the
subnets in our network and then mapped
out what we're going to do with it.
Which subnets are in which buildings.
Again, we have over 400 subnets.
Our network topology is pretty complex.
It's a standard Cisco core
edge style layout.
So one of the big things is just
figuring out how to flow these clients,
where the client's supposed to go.
Once you've determined
that-- so for this example,
we have the other building.
If you're in a building that
doesn't have a dedicated server,
you'll talk to the Zen server.
It's going to say, oh,
you're out in some odd place.
So we're going to send
you to the data center.
So you'll boot off the Zen 91
or Zen 92 servers that are
basically in the building 90.
If, on the other hand,
you're in a building that
has a dedicated server,
such as the building three client,
then it's going to say, oh,
you're in building three.
We're going to send you
straight to Zen three.
So that NetBoot server is basically
installed in the network closet.
So your connection is really short,
really high speed.
It's worked out incredibly well,
almost too well.
So here's some of the code that I wrote
in our AppleScript Studio application.
This is basically--this
is AppleScript code,
but it's forming a shell command.
Basically, that shell command is a curl,
so it's just command line URL retrieval.
What this does is this is forming
basically an HTTP request that it
posts up to the database server.
You can see here how we're able to
capture all these different variables,
and we're using
The, just all the utilities available on
the Mac to dig out this information.
We're looking at a lot of different
places to find the hard drive name,
machine name, amount of memory,
amount of disk space, the user account.
We take all these details and
post that up to the database.
And again, one of the really important
things here is the IP address,
which we use to determine
where the client's at.
And that's actually in a different post.
So the MySQL database will
store all this information,
keeps track of session times,
where clients came from,
how long it took them.
And then the PHP scripts actually control
the flow of the queue and determine
which server a client should go to.
This is kind of a walkthrough
of the session flow.
Basically,
the user will launch the client,
collects the data,
post that up to the database,
and then the server will
reply with a session ID.
And we're just using this to
keep track of the client all
the way through the process.
Again, we're going through
three different reboots,
so we want to write that client
ID down to the hard drive
so we can keep track of it.
Basically,
once we've done all those checks and the
user clicks begin on the application,
the client's going to request
a position in the queue.
That's going to go up to the
database server and the PHP server
and ask for a position in the queue.
It's going to look up the IP address.
It's going to compare our subnet
table to say where is this IP address,
where should we send it to.
It's going to then check the server queue
and see if that server has open slots.
Basically,
what we did is we said we never
want more than 20 clients booting
off of a single server at a time.
So, the day we announced this,
everybody's so excited to
get their hands on Tiger.
Wow, spotlight.
We were really concerned about
having a huge flood on that day.
So, we really wanted to be
able to back that off.
So, what will happen is if the client
can't get a position in the queue,
it will basically pass back
down to that interface for the
user and says you're queued up.
You're user 25 out of 20 people.
So, as they're waiting to get a position,
they'll see that tick down.
And once people come
off that NetBoot server,
then we free that up right away.
So once they have an active slot,
they basically go to the NetBoot start.
At this point, the system will reboot.
It's booting off of the IP address
that was pressed into the firmware.
Once you go through that,
it'll start up our custom
RC local on the NetBoot image.
That RC file will post up to
the database as soon as the
client's done with the NetBoot.
So at this point,
we're one step away from
restarting the system.
And we basically say, hey,
we're out of the queue.
So that'll free up a spot in
the queue for another system.
Then that client reboots,
goes to another RC local,
And that is basically the RCLocal that
throws up the custom installation screen.
It says we're installing
additional packages.
Here's where we do 10.4.7, 10.4.4.
We do NetBoot, Landesk,
a lot of different pieces.
Some of the NetBoot cleanup.
We remove that session ID from the drive,
all that kind of stuff.
So then it does a final reboot,
and you're done.